---
layout: post
title: Ekko and Greylock Hackfest 2015
description: Simple utility to enable quick collaboration
thumb_image: "about.jpg"
tags: [macos, swift, hci, design]
---
> This work was done during the 2015 Greylock Hackfest

Coming to a hackathon with no idea what you want to work on is always leads to the same thing. 
Once you have your team, the HQ for the next 36ish hours and unpacked the two backpacks worth of 
computer hardware, maybe an extra keyboard and mouse and some pillows you then preceed to spend the
next 2-3 hours throwing around ideas, most of which are either stupid or too hard. This is exactly 
what happened when we got to the old [...] office that Greylock converted into one of the best
run hackathon spaces I've been to. There was a chocolate fountain, a carnival outside with churros,
food trucks, a ping pong table and hammocks. So you can waste a bit of time exploring the space and 
talking to people but ultimately you need to sit down and figure out what to do. Sitting side by 
side next to my team at the cleared out desk of some engineer we started talking about technologies we
wanted to try out, looking up documentation and finding out that our genius idea was done 6 times before. I had a web page open and was telling my teammate next to me to look it up and thats when we had the idea for our project. Why can't you just drag my browser window onto yours? Like syn...... but for collaboration to fit the classic template. 

It started out as a silly idea but as we thought about it, the ability to just open a page on someone
elses machine is actually really cool  (given you do the work to curb spamming and other security
concerns). Especially in the one to many case, i.e. I open a window on all of my teammates screens. We also thought that the movemement of dragging the window off the screen was a nice intuitive interaction
that is easy to remember since it feels contextual. 

Now you may ask why sending the URL isnt good enough and it is, but if you break down the steps to 
do so you get:
    
1. Click on the URL bar
2. Highlight the entire URL (while there are shortcuts to do this, its "not inuitive" you need to create the muscle memory, and using the mouse can incure errors) 
3. Copy the URL
4. Paste it
5. Send the message
6. Everyone else has to click on it
    
This is compared to:

1. Drag the window off the screen 
2. There is no step 2

## Ekko
So cool idea, how do you implement it?
    
    
Everyone on our team had Macs and we wanted to play with Swift so we chose to make a toolbar extention.
It creates a hotzone on the right hand side, where if a window is dragged into it, it turns slightly grey and instantly the same website is opened on everyone else in the rooms 

We get the URL from the browser using AppleScript, which is an incredible feature of the operating system. Its directly integrateable within a MacOS app and taps into all the hooks app makers make.

We used Firebase to manage the URL transmission.
